---
layout: post
title: "Nile River Dispute between Ethopia, Sudan and Egypt"
date: 2019-11-07 22:21:06 -0700
comments: true
tags: politics
---

It all started with one news article [here](https://abcnews.go.com/amp/International/wireStory/egypts-top-diplomat-nile-dispute-resolved-january-66820588) and I went down a rabbit hole as to what is this Nile dispute all about. Political news, crisis reports, few wikipedia sources and I landed up [this](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abiy_Ahmed) page. Now, wait. This gets interesting. I have seen this guy before on Twitter and that too very recently. I was right! It's right in the second paragraph of the page. He was the Nobel Peace Prize recipient for 2019. And I now I wanted to read all about it. 

Sometimes it takes one small interest or familar news which can pique your interest.

Nile river dispute started all the way back in 2010 (actually it's much more older than this but more about it later). I believe everyone had heard of river Nile. It is one of the longest flowing river in the world that passes through Egypt, Sudan and Ethopia. You can check out the worldmap [here](https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1WouvrIFG1Z_aTy_zDf1HcMrI1sQ&ll=16.67794853931617%2C39.29985206989579&z=5). It is so large that if you take a round trip of the Nile river, you will have walked the distance of the diameter of the Earth. It's huge!

Coming back to the dispute. To understand this water dispute, one needs to understand the flow of this river betwwen the three countries. Nile has a downstream flow when it flows down from Ethopia to Sudan to Egypt. Historicaly, as we know from our high school geography books, Egyptian civilization flourished around the basins of the Nile river. Till today, Egypt is highly dependent in Nile for its irrigation needs. Now, any disruptions to this downstream flow of water may affect the economy of Egypy. Atleast this is what Egypt is claiming. This is where the dispute of the Nile river omes in.

In 2010, Ethopian government surveyed the area around river Nile in their country and a year later, announced the construction of one of the biggest dams that was expected to generate 45 GW (cuurent estimate is 60+ GW) of hydro-electricity. This dam has been called by different names: 'Project X', 'Millenium Dam' and as currently called 'Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam'. Till date the project is almost 60% completed but has, since it's incetion, created a political conflict in the country.

Where Ethopia on one hand relaizes that this dam can substancially raise the standards of the country's economic condition, Egypt believes that the dam will adversarily affect the already crumbling Egyptian economy. 

This is what's happening between Egypt on north and Ethopia in the south. Where does Sudan come into play? It's right in the middle of the political deadlock and completes the triangle of nations in this dispute. Its main tributaries, the White and Blue Niles, converge in Sudanese capital Khartoum before flowing north through Egypt to drain into the Mediterranean Sea. It finds itself in unique position as, being a downstream nation, it has same concerns as Eqypt, however, it needs the hydropower generated by the Ethopian dam. from most news sources, it appears that Sudan is siding with Ethopia on the dam construction for now, conditionally.I have yet to find a good resource on what Sudan's condition are. I will update the post once I find one.

And btw, remember the guy I was talking about initially.He is Abyi Ahmed Ali, the current Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethopia.
